
## Definition and first examples

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *symmetric monoidal structure* on a preorder $(X, \leq)$

<div id="smp"/></div>
Two additional constituents:

- A *monoidal unit* $I \in X$
- A *monoidal product* $X \times X \xrightarrow{\otimes} X$

Satisfying the following properties:

- Monotonicity: $\forall x_1,x_2,y_1,y_2 \in X: x_1 \leq y_1 \land x_2 \leq y_2 \implies x_1 \otimes x_2 \leq y_1 \otimes y_2$
- Unitality: $\forall x \in X: I \otimes x = x = x \otimes I$
- Associativity: $\forall x,y,z \in X: (x \otimes y) \otimes z = x \otimes (y\otimes z)$
- Symmetry: $\forall x,y \in X: x \otimes y = y \otimes x$
:::

The notation for monoidal product and unit may vary depending on context. 
$I, \otimes$ are defaults but it may be best to use $(0,+),(1,*),(true, \land)$ 
(etc.)

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *weak monoidal structure* on a preorder $(X, \leq)$

<div id="weak-smp"/></div>
Definition is identical to a symmetric monoidal structure, replacing all $=$ 
signs with $\cong$ signs.

:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Discrete SMP
<div id="discrete-smp"/></div>
- A monoid is a set $M$ with a monoid unit $e \in M$ and associative monoid multiplication $M \times M \xrightarrow{\star} M$ such that $m \star e=m=e \star m$
- Every set $S$ determines a discrete preorder: $\mathbf{Disc}_S$
- It is easy to check if $(M,e,\star)$ is a commutative monoid then $(\mathbf{Disc}_M, =, e, \star)$ is a symmetric monoidal preorder.

:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Poker hands
<div id="poker"/></div>
- Let $H$ be the set of all poker hands, ordered by $h \leq h'$ if $h'$ beats or ties hand $h$.
- One can propose a monoidal product by assigning $h_1 \otimes h_2$ to be "the best hand one can form out of the ten cards in $h_1 \bigcup h_2$"
- This proposal will \textbf{fail} monotonicity with the following example:
    - $h_1 := \{2\heartsuit, 3\heartsuit,10 \spadesuit,J\spadesuit,Q\spadesuit\} \leq i_1 := \{4\spadesuit,4\spadesuit,6\heartsuit,6\diamondsuit,10\diamondsuit\}$
    - $h_2 := \{2\diamondsuit,3\diamondsuit,4\diamondsuit,K\spadesuit,A\spadesuit\} \leq i_2 := \{5\spadesuit,5\heartsuit,7\heartsuit,J\diamondsuit,Q\diamondsuit\}$
    - $h_1 \otimes h_2=\{10\spadesuit,J\spadesuit,Q\spadesuit,K\spadesuit,A\spadesuit\} \not \leq i_2 \otimes i_2 = \{5\spadesuit, 5\heartsuit,6\heartsuit,6\diamondsuit,Q\diamondsuit\}$
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-5
<div id="2-5"/></div>

Consider the reals ordered by our normal $\leq$ relation. Do es$(1,*)$ work as unit and product for a symmetric monoidal structure?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
No, monotonicity fails: $x_1\leq y_1 \land x_2 \leq y_2 \not \implies x_1x_2 \leq y_1y_2$

(Counterexample: $x_1=x_2=-1, y_1=y_2=0$)

:::
:::



::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-8
<div id="2-8"/></div>

Check if $(M,e,\star)$ is a commutative monoid then $(\mathbf{Disc}_M, =, e, \star)$ is a symmetric monoidal preorder, as described in the discrete SMP example above.

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
- Monotonicity is the only tricky one, and is addressed due to the triviality of the discrete preorder.
    - We can replace $x \leq y$ with $x \leq x$ because it is a discrete preorder.
    - $x_1 \leq x_1 \land x_2 \leq x_2 \implies x_1 \otimes x_2 \leq x_1 \otimes x_2$
    - $True \land True \implies True$ is vacuously true due to reflexivity of preorder.
- Unitality/associativity comes from unitality/associativity of monoid
- Symmetry comes from commutitivity of monoid.



:::
:::


## Introducing wiring diagrams

- Visual representations for building new relationships from old.
- For a preorder without a monoidal structure, we can only chain relationships linearly (due to transitivity).
- For a symmetric monoidal structure, we can combine relationships in series and in parallel.
- Call boxes and wires *icons*
- Any element $x \in X$ can be a label for a wire. Given $x$ and $y$, we can write them as two wires in parallel or one wire $x \otimes y$; these are two ways of representing the same thing.
- Consider a wire labeled $I$ to be equivalent to the absence of a wire.
- Given a $\leq$ block, we say a wiring diagram is *valid* if the monoidal product of elements on the left is less than those on the right.
- Let's consider the properties of the order structure:
    - Reflexivity: a diagram consisting of just one wire is always valid.
    - Transitivity: diagrams can be connected together if outputs = inputs
    - Monotonicity: Stacking two valid boxes in parallel is still valid.
    - Unitality: We need not worry about $I$ or blank space
    - Associativity: Need not worry about building diagrams from top-to-bottom or vice-versa.
    - Symmetry: A diaagram is valid even if its wires cross.
- One may regard crossing wires as another *icon* in the iconography.
- Wiring diagrams can be thought of as graphical proofs
    - If subdiagrams are true, then the outer diagram is true.


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-20
<div id="2-20"/></div>

 Given the assertions the interior of this wiring diagram:  \begin{tikzcd}[ampersand replacement=\&] \pagecolor{white}
              \cdot \arrow[r, "t"]  \& \boxed{\leq} \arrow[rr, "v"] \arrow[rd, "w"]\& \& \boxed{\leq} \arrow[r, "y"] \& \cdot \\
              \cdot \arrow[rr, "u"] \& \& \boxed{\leq} \arrow[ru, "x"] \arrow[rr,"z"] \&                             \& \cdot
            \end{tikzcd}

Prove that the conclusion follows using the rules of symmetric monoidal preorders (make sure to use reflexivity and transitivity).

How do you know that symmetry axiom does not need to be invoked?


::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
Assertions:

- $t \leq v+w$
- $w+u \leq x+z$
- $v+x \leq y$

Conclusion: $t+u \leq y+z$

Proof:

- $(t)+(u) \leq (v+w)+(u)$ - from monotonicity and reflexivity of $u$
- $= v+(w+u)$ - associativity
- $\leq v+(x+z)$ - monotonicity and reflexivity of $v$
- $= (v+x)+z$ - associativity
- $\leq y+z$ - monotonicity and reflexivity of $z$

Symmetry was not needed because the diagram had no crossing wires.

:::
:::

## Applied examples
E.g. resource theories:

- As discussed here, we consider 'static' notions.
- Chemistry: reactants + catalyst $<$ products + catalyst
- Manufacturing: you can trash anything you want, and it disappears from view (requires $\forall x: x \leq I$)
- Informatics: in addition to trashing, information can be copied (requires $x \leq x + x$)

## Abstract examples
::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="smp-op"/></div>
The opposite of a symmetric monoidal preorder $(X, \geq, I, \otimes)$ is still a symmetric monoidal preorder

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof
- Monotonicity: $x_1 \geq y_1 \land x_2 \geq y_2 \implies x_1 \otimes x_2 \geq y_1 \otimes y_2$
    - This holds because monotonicity holds in the original preorder ($a\geq b \equiv b \leq a$).
- Unitality, symmetry, and associativity are not affected by the preorder.

:::
:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Natural numbers SMP
<div id="nat-smp"/></div>

There is a symmetric monoidal structure on $(\mathbb{N}, \leq)$ where the monoidal unit is zero and the product is plus. Monotonicity ($(x_1,x_2)\leq(y_1,y_2) \implies x_1+x_2 \leq y_1+y_2$) and other conditions hold.

:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Divisibility SMP
<div id="divisibility-smp"/></div>

- Recall the divisibility order $(\mathbb{N}, |)$
- There is a symmetric monoidal structure on this preorder with unit $1$ and product $*$.
-  Monotonicity ($x_1|y_1 \land x_2|y_2 \implies x_1*x_2 | y_1*y_2$) and other conditions hold.
:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Cost SMP
<div id="cost"/></div>
- Lawvere's symmetric monoidal preorder, **Cost**.
- Let $[0,\infty]$ represent the non-negative real numbers with infinity. Also take the usual notion of $\geq$.
- There is a monoidal structure for this preorder: $\mathbf{Cost}:=([0,\infty],\geq,0,+)$
    - The monoidal unit being zero means "you can get from $a$ to $a$ at no cost."
    - The product being + means "getting from $a$ to $c$ is **at most** the cost of $a$ to $b$ **plus** $b$ to $c$"
    - The 'at most' above comes from the $\geq$.
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-31
<div id="2-31"/></div>

Show there is a SMP on $(\mathbb{N}, \leq)$ where the monoidal product is $6*4=24$. What should the monoidal unit be?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- Let the monoidal product be the standard product for integers, with 1 as unit.
    - Monotonicity: $(x_1,x_2)\leq (y_1,y_2) \implies x_1x_2 \leq y_1y_2$
    - Unitality: $1*x_1=x_1=x_1*1$
    - Associativity: $a*(b*c)=(a*b)*c$
    - Symmetry: $a*b=b*a$



:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-33
<div id="2-33"/></div>

Recall the divisibility order $(\mathbb{N}, |)$. Someone proposes $(0,+)$ as the monoidal unit and product. Does this satisfy the conditions of a symmetric monoidal structure?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
Conditions 2-4 are satisfied, but not monotonicity: $1|1 \land 2|4$ but not $3 | 5$

:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-34
<div id="2-34"/></div>

- Consider the preorder defined by the Hasse diagram $\boxed{no \rightarrow maybe \rightarrow yes}$
- Consider a potential monoidal structure with $yes$ as the unit and $min$ as the product.
- Fill out a reasonable definition of $min$ and check that it satisfies the conditions.

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

| $min$ | no | maybe | yes   |
|-------|---|--------|-------|
| **no**    | no | no    | no    |
| **maybe** | no | maybe | maybe |
| **yes**   | no | maybe | yes   |


- Monotonicity: $x_1 \leq y_1 \land x_2 \leq y_2 \implies x_1x_2 \leq y_1y_2$
    -  Suppose without loss of generality that $x_1\leq x_2$
    - then $x_1x_2=x_1$ and $y_1y_2 = y_1$ or $y_2$
    - In the first case, we know this is true because we assumed $x_1 \leq y_1$
    - In the second case, we know it from transitivity: $x_1 \leq x_2\leq y_2$
- Unitality: $min(x,yes)=x$
- Associativity: probably
- Symmetry: table is symmetric.


:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-35
<div id="2-35"/></div>

Check that there is a SMP on the power set of $S$ ordered by subset relation. (The unit is $S$ and product is $\cap$)

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
- Monotonicity: $x_1 \subseteq y_1 \land x_2 \subseteq y_2 \implies x_1 \cap x_2 \subseteq y_1 \cap y_2$
        - This is true: if something is in both $x_1,x_2$, then it is in both $y_1,y_2$, i.e. in their intersection.
- Unitality: $x \cap S = x = S \cap x$, since $\forall x \in P(S): x \subseteq S$.
- Associativity and symmetry come from associativity and symmetry of $\cap$ operator.


:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-36
<div id="2-36"/></div>
- Let $Prop^\mathbb{N}$ be the set of all mathematical statements one can make about a natural number.
- Examples:
    - $n$ is a prime
    - $n$ = 2
    - $n \geq 11$
- We say $P \leq Q$ if for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, $P(n) \implies Q(n)$
- Define a monoidal unit and product on $(Prop^\mathbb{N}, \leq)$.

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- Let the unit be $\lambda x. true$ and product be $\land$
- montonicity: $P_1(x)\leq Q_1(x) \land P_2(x) \leq Q_2(x) \implies (P_1 \land P_2)(x) \leq (Q_1 \land Q_2)(x)$
    - If the $P$ properties hold for a given number, then each of the $Q$ properties hold
- unitality, associativity, symmetry: same as $\mathbf{Bool}$
:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-40
<div id="2-40"/></div>

Consider $\mathbf{Cost}^{op}$. What is it as a preorder? What is its unit and product?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
As a preorder, the domain is still $[0,\infty]$ and ordered by the natural 
$\leq$ relation.  The unit and product are unchanged by taking the opposite 
preorder, so they are still $0, +$ respectively.

:::
:::

## Monoidal monotone maps

Monoidal montones are examples of *monoidal functors*, specifically *lax* ones.  
*Oplax* functors are a dual notion which has the inequalities reversed.

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *monoidal monotone map* from $(P,\leq_P,I_P,\otimes_P)$ to $(Q, \leq_Q,I_Q,\otimes_Q)$.
<div id="monoidal-monotone"/></div>

A [monotone map](../1/4.qmd#monotone-map) $(P,\leq_P) \xrightarrow{f} (Q,\leq_Q)$ 
satsifying two conditions:
  1. $I_Q \leq_Q f(I_P)$
  2. $\forall p_1,p_2 \in P:$ $f(p_1)\ \otimes_Q\ f(p_2)\ \leq_Q\ f(p_1\ \otimes_P\ p_2)$

If the $\leq$ are replaced with $\cong$, the map is *strong*, and if replaced 
with $=$, it is *strict*.

:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Monoidal monotones between $\mathbb{N}$ and $\mathbb{R}$
<div id="natural-real-monoidal-monotones"/></div>

- *Strict* monoidal monotone injection $i: (\mathbb{N},\leq, 0, +) \hookrightarrow (\mathbb{R},\leq,0,+)$
- There is also a monoidal monotone $(\mathbb{R}^+,\leq, 0, +) \xrightarrow{\lfloor x \rfloor} (\mathbb{N},\leq,0,+)$
    - Monotonic: $x \leq_\mathbb{R} y \implies \lfloor x \rfloor \leq \lfloor y \rfloor$
    - But it is neither strict nor strong: $\lfloor 0.5 \rfloor + \lfloor 0.5 \rfloor \not \cong \lfloor 0.5+0.5 \rfloor$

:::




::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-43
<div id="2-43"/></div>

Consider a proposed monoidal monotone $\mathbf{Bool}\xrightarrow{g}\mathbf{Cost}$ 
with $g(false)=\infty, g(true)=0$

- Check that the map is monotonic and that it satisfies both properties of 
  monoidal monotones.
- Is $g$ strict?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

-  It is monotonic:  $\forall a,b \in \mathbb{B}: a\leq b \implies g(a)\leq g(b)$
    - there is only one nonidentity case in $\mathbf{Bool}$ to cover, and it is 
      true that $\infty\ \leq_\mathbf{Cost}\ 0$.
- Condition on units: $0 \leq_\mathbf{Cost} g(true)$ (actually, it is equal)
- In $\mathbf{Cost}$: $g(x) + g(y) \geq g(x \land y)$
    - if both true/false, the equality condition holds.
    - If one is true and one is false, then LHS and RHS are $\infty$ (as 
      $x \land y = False$).
- Therefore this is a *strict* monoidal monotone.

:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-44
<div id="2-44"/></div>

- Consider the following functions $\mathbf{Cost} \xrightarrow{d,u} \mathbf{Bool}$
  - $d(x>0)\mapsto false,\ d(0)\mapsto true$
  - $u(x=\infty)\mapsto false,\ d(x < \infty) \mapsto true$
- For both of these, answer:

1. Is it [monotonic](../1/4.qmd#monotone-map)?
2. If so, does it satsify the monoidal monotone properties?
3. If so, is it strict?


::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- The function $d$ asks "Is it zero?'', and the function $u$ asks "Is it finite?''.
- Both of these questions are monotone: as we traverse forward in $\leq_{Cost}$, 
  we traverse towards being zero or being finite.
- The first monoidal monotone axiom is satisifed in both because the unit ($0$) 
  is mapped to the unit ($True$).
- The second monoidal monotone axiom holds for both because addition preserves 
  both things being zero (or not) and both things being finite (or not).
- These are strict because, in $\mathbb{B}$, equality and congruence coincide.


:::
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-45
<div id="2-45"/></div>

1.  Is $(\mathbb{N},\leq,1,*)$ a SMP?
2. If so, does there exist a monoidal monotone $(\mathbb{N},\leq,0,+) \rightarrow (\mathbb{N},\leq,1,*)$
3. Is $(\mathbb{Z},\leq,*,1)$ a SMP?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1. Yes. Monotonicity holds, and multiplication by $1$ is unital. The operator 
   is symmetric and associative.
2. Exponentiation (say, by $2$) is a *strict* monoidal monotone.
  - $1 = 2^0$ and $2^x * 2^y = 2^{x+y}$
3. No: monotonicity does not hold (multiplying negative numbers gives a larger number).
:::
:::
