
## Monoidal closed preorders


::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) $\mathcal{V}:=(V,\leq,I,\otimes)$ is *symmetric monoidal closed* (or just *closed*)

<div id="closed-smp"/></div>
For every $v,w \in V$, there is an element $v \multimap w \in V$ called the *hom-element* with the property:

-  $\forall a,v,w \in V: (a \otimes v) \leq w$ iff $a \leq (v \multimap w)$
:::


::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A [category](3.qmd#v-cat) $\mathcal{V}$ that is *enriched* in itself}.

<div id="self-enriched"/></div>
-  For every $v,w \in Ob(\mathcal{V})$ we can define $\mathcal{V}(v,w)$ as $(v \multimap w) \in \mathcal{V}$
- For this to be an enrichment, we need to check the two conditions.
    - The first condition $I \leq \mathcal{X}(x,x) = x \multimap x$ is satsified because $I \otimes x \leq x$
    - The second condition is satisfied by SMP currying
:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## **Cost** is closed
<div id="cost-closed"/></div>
The symmetric monoidal preorder $\mathbf{Cost}:=([0,\infty],\geq,0,+)$ is monoidal closed.

- For any $x,y \in [0,\infty]$, define $x \multimap y := max(0,y-x)$
- Then, for any $a,x,y$, we have $a+x\geq y$ iff $a \geq y-x$ iff $max(0,a)\geq max(0,y-x)$ iff $a \geq (x \multimap y)$
- We can use this to define a notion of subtraction in **Cost**.
:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Meaning of monoidal closed in chemistry resource theories
<div id="?"/></div>
What would a monoidal closed structure mean for the resource theory of chemistry?

- For any two material collections, one can form a material collection $c \multimap d$ with the property that, for any $a$ one has $a + c \rightarrow d$ iff $a \rightarrow (c \multimap d)$
- Concretely, say we have $2 {\rm H_2O} + 2 {\rm Na} \rightarrow 2 {\rm NaOH} + {\rm H_2}$, we must also have $2{\rm H_2O} \rightarrow (2{\rm Na} \multimap (2{\rm NaOH}+{\rm H_2}))$
- From two molecules of water, you can form a certain substance. This doesn't make sense, so maybe this [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) is not closed.
- Alternatively, think of the substance $2{\rm Na} \multimap (2{\rm NaOH}+{\rm H_2})$ as a *potential reaction*, that of converting sodium to sodium-hyroxide+hydrogen. Two molecules of water unlock that potential.
:::

::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="smp-curry"/></div>

Suppose $\mathcal{V}:=(V,\leq,I,\otimes,\multimap)$ is a closed [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp)}.

a. For every $v \in V$ the [monotone map](2.qmd#monoidal-monotone) $(V, \leq) \xrightarrow{-\otimes v}(V,\leq)$ is left adjoint to $(V, \leq)\ \xrightarrow{v \multimap -} (V,\leq)$
b. For any element $v \in V$ and a subset of elements $A \subseteq V$, if the join $\bigvee A$ exists, then so does $\bigvee_{a \in A} v \otimes a$ and we have $(v \otimes \bigvee A)\cong  \bigvee_{a \in A} v \otimes a$
c. $\forall v,w \in V: v \otimes (v \multimap w) \leq w$
d. $\forall v \in V: v \cong (I \multimap v)$
e. $\forall u,v,w \in V: (u \multimap v) \otimes (v \multimap w) \leq (u \multimap w)$


::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof

a. The [meaning](../1/6.qmd#galois-connection) of $(- \otimes v) \dashv (v \multimap -)$ is exactly the condition of $\multimap$ in a closed symmetric monoidal preorder.
b. This follows from (1), using the fact that [left adjoints preserve joins](#../1/6.qmd#adjoints-preserve).
c. This follows from (1) using the [alternative characterization](../1/6.qmd#alternate-galois) of Galois connections.
    - Alternatively, start from definition of closed symmetric monoidal preorder and substitute $v \multimap w$ for $a$, and note by reflexivity that  $(v \multimap w) \leq (v \multimap w)$
    - Then we obtain $(v \multimap w) \otimes v \leq w$ (by symmetry of $\otimes$ we are done)

d. Since $v \otimes I = v \leq v$, then the closed condition means that $v \leq I \multimap v$
    - For the other direction, we have $I \multimap v = I \otimes (I \multimap v) \leq v$ by (c).

e. We need $u \otimes (u \multimap v) \otimes (v \multimap w) \leq w$
    - This follows from two applications of the third part of this proposition.
:::
:::



::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-82
<div id="2-82"/></div>

Prove that a [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) is closed iff, given any $v \in V$, the map $V \xrightarrow{(-\otimes v)}V$ given by multiply with $v$ has a right adjoint.  We write this adjoint $V \xrightarrow{(v \multimap -)}V$:

1. Show that $V \xrightarrow{(-\otimes v)}V$ is [monotone](../1/4.qmd#monotone-map).
2. Supposing that $\mathcal{V}$ is closed, show that $\forall v,w \in V: ((v \multimap w)\otimes v) \leq w$
3. Show that $(v \multimap -)$ is monotone.
4. Conclude that a [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) is closed iff the monotone map $(- \otimes v)$ has a [right adjoint](../1/6.qmd#galois-connection).

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1.
    - Given the monotonicity constraint of $\otimes$
    - And reflexivity: $v \leq v$, we have:
    - $x_1 \leq y_1$ implies that $(x_1 \otimes v) \leq (y_1 \otimes v)$
2. Substitute $v \multimap w$ for $a$ into the closed property equation, to get $((v \multimap w)\otimes v) \leq w \iff v \multimap w \leq v \multimap w$ (the RHS is true by reflexivity, so the LHS must be true).
3. Need to show: if we assume $x \leq y$ then we can conclude $(v \multimap x) \leq (v \multimap y)$
    - From the previous part, we have $(v \multimap x) \otimes v \leq x$ and $(v \multimap y) \otimes v \leq y$
    - Assuming the antecedant $x \leq y$, and given transitivity, we have $(v \multimap x) \otimes v \leq (v \multimap y) \otimes v$
    - Because the $\otimes$ operation must be monotonic, the consequent follows.
4. A Galois connection requires that both maps be monotone and that they satisfy $f(p)\leq q$ iff $p \leq g(q)$. This is the relation captured by the closed property equation, and both maps were shown to be monotone.
:::
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-85
<div id="2-85"/></div>

Show that $\mathbf{Bool}=(\mathbb{B},\leq, true, \land)$ is monoidal closed.


::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- Our translation is: $\otimes \mapsto \land,\ \leq \mapsto \implies$
- Condition for being closed is then:
- $\forall a,v,w:$ $(a \land v) \implies w$ iff $a \implies (v \multimap w)$
- On the LHS, we have the truth table:

|  a | v | w | $(a \land v) \implies w$ |
|---|---|---|-----|
|  F | F | F | T                       |
|  F | F | T | T                       |
|  F | T | F | T                       |
|  F | T | T | T                       |
|  T | F | F | T                       |
|  T | F | T | T                       |
|  T | T | F | F                       |
|  T | T | T | T |

- In order to define $v \multimap w$ in a way consistent with this, we need it to *only* be false when $v=true, w=false$, which is the truth condition for $v \implies w$.
- This is consistent with a 'single use v-to-w converter' analogy.
:::
:::


## Quantales


- Think of a unital, commutative, quantale as a kind of navigator.
    - A navigator understands 'getting from one place to another'
    - Different navigators understand different aspects (whether one can get from $A$ to $B$, how much time it will take, ...)
    - What they share in common is that, given routes $A$ to $B$ and $B$ to $C$, they understand how to get a route $A$ to $C$.
- Because all joins implies all meets|, a quantale has all meets and joins (even though we define it simply as having all joins).



::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *unital commutative quantale* (or just *quantale*, in this book)

<div id="quantale"/></div>
-  A symmetric monoidal closed preorder $\mathcal{V}=(V,\leq,I,\otimes,\multimap)$ that has all [joins](../1/5/#join).
- $\bigvee A$ exists for all $A \subseteq V$
- Denote the empty join as $0 := \bigvee \varnothing$
:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## **Cost** is a quantale
<div id="cost-quantale"/></div>

- We saw that **Cost** is monoidal closed above.
- To check if **Cost** is a quantale, we take an arbitrary set of elements and ask if it has a [join](../1/5.qmd#join).
- Because $\geq$ is a total order, we can take the *infimum* or greatest lower bound, as the join.
    - $\bigvee\{2.5,2.05,2.005,...\} = 2$.
- We need a $0$, which is something which is related to everything (the first join condition is vacuous). Because the preorder relation is $\geq$ in **Cost** we need something greater than everything, so $0 = \infty$.
- Thus **Cost** is a quantale.
:::


::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="all-joins-meets"/></div>

Let $(P,\leq)$ be a preorder. It has all [joins](../1/5#join) iff it has all [meets](../1/5/#meet).

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof

- Meets and joins are dual, so it suffices to prove one of the directions (the [opposite category](4.qmd#2-73) shows that having all meets having all joins, if we are able to prove that having all joins means having all meets in the original preorder).
- Suppose there are all joins and $A \subseteq P$ is a subset for which we want the meet.
- Consider the set $M_A := \{p \in P\ |\ \forall a \in A: p \leq a \}$ (everything below all of $A$ - these are candidates for the meet of $A$)
- The first condition for the meet is satisfied by all. We get the actual meet by taking $\bigvee M_A$ which is guaranteed to exist. Because this element is greater than or equal to all elements that are $\leq A$, it satisfies the second condition for the meet.
:::
:::

::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="quantale-all-joins"/></div>

Suppose $\mathcal{V}=(V,\leq,I,\otimes)$ is a [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) that has all [joins](../1/5/#join).

- Then $\mathcal{V}$ is closed, i.e. has a $\multimap$ operation and hence is a quantale, iff $\otimes$ distributes over joins
- i.e. if SMP currying Eq #2 holds: $(v \otimes \bigvee A)\cong  \bigvee_{a \in A} v \otimes a$.

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof

-  We proved one direction in SMP currying.
- We need to show that $(v \otimes \bigvee A)\cong  \bigvee_{a \in A} v \otimes a$ (and all joins existing) implies that there exists a $\multimap$ operation that satisfies the closed property: $\forall a,v,w \in V: (a \otimes v) \leq w$ iff $a \leq (v \multimap w)$.
- The [adjoint functor theorem for preorders](../1/6/#adjoint-functor-theorem) states that [monotone maps](../1/4.qmd#monotone-map) preserve joins iff they're left adjoint, so $V \xrightarrow{-\otimes v} V$ must have a right adjoint $g$, which, being a [Galois connection](../1/6.qmd#galois-connection), will satisfy the property $(a \otimes v) \leq w \iff a \leq g(w)$ (this is the monoidal closed property).
- Let's rename $g \equiv v \multimap -$. The adjoint functor theorem even gives us a construction for the right adjoint, namely: $v \multimap w:=\bigvee\{a \in V\ |\ a \otimes v \leq w\}$.
:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-92
<div id="2-92"/></div>

1.   What is $\bigvee \varnothing$, called $0$, in the case of:

- $\mathcal{V}=\mathbf{Bool}=\{\mathbb{B},\leq, true,\land\}$
- $\mathcal{V}=\mathbf{Cost}=([0,\infty],\geq,0,+)$
2. What is the [join](../1/5#join) $x \vee y$ for **Bool** and **Cost**?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1.  $False$ and $\infty$ respectively
2. Logical or and $min$ respectively
:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-93
<div id="2-93"/></div>

Show that **Bool** is a quantale

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
The [joins](../1/5#join) all exist:

- nontrivial ones: $\varnothing \mapsto False, \{True,False\}\mapsto True$

:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-94
<div id="2-94"/></div>

Recall the power set [symmetric monoidal preorder](2.qmd#smp) $(P(S),\subseteq, S, \cap)$ Is this a quantale?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
Yes, $0=\varnothing$ (it is related to everything) and the join of any pair of subsets is well-defined as their union. Because it is a SMP with all joins it is a quantale.

:::
:::


## Matrix multiplication in a quantale


::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *matrix with entries in* $\mathcal{V}$, where $\mathcal{V}=(V, \leq, \otimes, I)$ is a quantale. (A $\mathcal{V}$ matrix).

<div id="v-matrix"/></div>

-  Need two sets, and function $X \times Y \xrightarrow{M} V$. Call $M(x,y)$ the (x,y)th entry.
- We can multiply $X \times Y \xrightarrow{M} V$ and $Y \times Z \xrightarrow{N} V$ to get a new $\mathcal{V}$ matrix $X \times Z \xrightarrow{M*N} V$.
    - $(M*N)(x,z)(x,z)$ defined as $\bigvee_y\ M(x,y)\otimes N(y,z)$
    - Note that this is similar to the standard matrix multiplication, with $\bigvee \mapsto \Sigma, \otimes \mapsto *$
:::

The identity $\mathcal{V}$ matrix, $X \times X \xrightarrow{I_X} \mathcal{V}$ has $I$ on the diagonal entries and $0$ on the off-diagonal entries.

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Matrix multiplication in **Bool**
<div id="matmul-bool"/></div>

Let $\mathcal{V}=\mathbf{Bool}$. Here is matrix multiplication $M*N$ with $X=\bar{3}, Y=\bar{2},Z=\bar{3},M=X\times Y\rightarrow Z, N=Y\times Z\rightarrow B$.

$X$

|   F | F |
|--|--|
|  F | T |
| T | T |


$Y$

|T | T | F |
|--|--|--|
| T | F | T |

$X*Y$

|F | F | F |
|--|--|--|
|T | F | T |
|T | T | T |
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-103
<div id="2-103"/></div>

Write the 2x2 identity matrices for each of the quantales:

1. $(\mathbb{N},\leq,1,*)$
2. $\mathbf{Bool}:=(\mathbb{B},\leq,true,\land)$
3. $\mathbf{Cost}:=([0,\infty],\leq,0,+)$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

1.

| 1 | 0 |
|--|--|
| 0 | 1 |

2.

| T | F |
|--|--|
| F | T |

3.

| 0        | $\infty$ |
|--|--|
| $\infty$ | 0        |


:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-104
<div id="2-104"/></div>

Let $\mathcal{V}=(V,\leq,I,\otimes,\multimap)$ be a quantale. Prove:

1. The identity law
    - For all $\mathcal{V}$ matrices $X\times Y\xrightarrow{M}V$, one has $I_X * M = M$

2. The associative law
    - For any matrices $W \times X \xrightarrow{M} V, X \times Y \xrightarrow{N} V, Y \times Z \xrightarrow{P} V$, one has $(M*N)*P=M*(N*P)$


::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1.
  - $\forall v \in \mathcal{V}$, we have $0 \otimes v \cong 0$.
    - $0 \otimes v$
    - $\cong v \otimes 0$ -- symmetry
    - $= v \otimes \bigvee_{a \in \varnothing} a$ -- definition of $0$
    - $\cong \bigvee_{a \in \varnothing} v \otimes a$ --  $-\otimes x$ preserves joins b/c it is left adjoint
    - $= 0$ -- definition of 0
  - Plug this into definition of matrix multiplication
    - $I_X * M(x,y)$
    - $= \bigvee_{x'}I_x(x,x')\otimes M(x',y)$ -- definition of matrix multiplication in a quantale
    - $=(I_x(x,x)\otimes M(x,y))\vee(\bigvee_{x'\ne x}I_x(x,x')\otimes M(x',y))$ -- split join into two cases
    - $=(I\otimes M(x,y))\vee(\bigvee_{x'\ne x}0\otimes M(x',y))$ -- Definition of identity matrix
    - $=M(x,y)\vee 0$ --  join of a singleton set
    - $=M(x,y)$ -- Zero is the least element in $\mathcal{V}$

2.
    - Need to show $\underset{y \in Y}\bigvee (\underset{x\in X}\bigvee M(w,x)\otimes N(x,y))\otimes P(y,z)$ is the same as $\underset{x \in X}\bigvee M(w,x)\otimes(\underset{y \in Y}\bigvee N(x,y) \otimes P(y,z))$ for all $w \in W,z \in Z$
    - The associativity of $\otimes$ and the fact it preserves joins b/c it is left adjoint lets us shift the symbols around appropriately.
:::
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 2-105
<div id="2-105"/></div>

Consider the distance matrix represented by this graph:

\begin{tikzcd}[ampersand replacement=\&] \pagecolor{white}
  A  \arrow[d, "3", bend right] \& B \arrow[l, "2"', bend right] \arrow[d, "5"', bend left] \\
  D  \arrow[ru, "3"] \& C \arrow[l, "6", bend left]
\end{tikzcd}


|$\rightarrow$ | A  | B | C | D  |
|-----|--|--|--|--|
 | **A**             | 0  | 6 | 3 | 11 |
  |**B**             | 2  | 0 | 5 | 5  |
|**C**             | 5  | 3 | 0 | 8  |
 | **D**             | 11 | 9 | 6 | 0  |

Compute the distance matrix by power iteration of the matrix of the presentation.

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

| $M$ | A        | B        | C        | D        |
|---|----|---|----|---|
| **A**   | 0        | $\infty$ | $\infty$ | 3        |
| **B**   | 2        | 0        | 5        | $\infty$ |
| **C**   | $\infty$ | $\infty$ | 0        | 6        |
| **D**   | $\infty$ | 3        | $\infty$ | 0        |


|  $M^2$ | A        | B | C        | D  |
|----|--------|---|-----|---|
|  A     | 0        | 6 | $\infty$ | 3  |
|  B     | 2        | 0 | 5        | 11 |
|  C     | $\infty$ | 9 | 0        | 6  |
|  D     | 5        | 3 | 8        | 0  |

  After this, $M^n$ is the $\rightarrow$ matrix
:::
:::