
::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *preorder* / *partial order* / *total order* [relation](2.qmd#relation) on a set $X$
<div id="preorder"/></div>

- Preorder: a binary relation on $X$ that is reflexive and transitive.
- A partial order (poset) has the additional constraint that $x \leq y \land y \leq x \implies x=y$
      - We can always get a partial order from a preorder by [quotienting](2.qmd#quotient), so it's not that special.
- A total order has all elements comparable.
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-53

<div id="1-53"/></div>
For any set $S$ there is a coarsest [partition](2.qmd#partition) having just one part.

What [surjective function](2.qmd#function) does this correspond to?

(Likewise for the finest partition?)

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
The trivial map to $\{1\}$ and the identity, respectively.
:::
:::


::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *graph* (of vertices and arrows)
<div id="graph"/></div>
- A tuple $G=(V, A, s, t)$
- Set of vertices and arrows, with two functions $A\rightarrow V$ which say where the source and target of each arrow goes to.
- A *path* in $G$ is any sequence of arrows such that the target of one arrow is the source of the next (including length 0 and 1 sequences).
:::

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## An *opposite preorder*
<div id="opposite-preorder"/></div>
Given a preorder $(P, \leq)$, we define $p \leq^{op} q \iff q \leq p$
:::

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## Skeletality
<div id="skeletality"/></div>
Categorical skeletality generally means $x \cong y \implies x = y$

E.g. a skeletal preorder is a *poset*.
:::

::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## An *upper set*
<div id="upper-set"/></div>
For $P$ for some preorder $(P, \leq)$:

- A subset $U$ of $P$ satisfying the condition $p \in U \land p \leq q \implies q \in U$
- Anything you add to the upper set means you have to add everything greater than it.
- Example: the possible upper sets of $Bool$ are $\{\varnothing, \{true\}, \{true, false\}\}$
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-55

<div id="1-55"/></div> Prove that the upper sets on a discrete preorder for some set $X$ is simply the power set $P(X)$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- The upper set criterion is satisfied by any subset, thus all possible subsets are upper sets.
    - The [binary relation](2.qmd#relation) is equality, thus the upper subset criterion becomes $p \in U \land p = q \implies q \in U$, or alternatively $p \in U \implies p \in U$, which is always satisfied.
:::
:::