
## Definition and examples
::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *Galois connection* between [preorders](3.qmd#preorder) $P$ and $Q$, and the *left and right adjoints* of a Galois connection

<div id="galois-connection"/></div>
A pair of [monotone maps](4.qmd#monotone-map) $P \xrightarrow{f} Q$ and 
$Q \xrightarrow{g} P$ such that:

- $f(p) \leq q \iff p \leq g(q)$
- $f$ is *left adjoint*, and $g$ is *right adjoint* of the Galois connection.
:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Floor and ceiling
<div id="floor-ceiling"/></div>
- Consider the map $\mathbb{Z} \xrightarrow{3z} \mathbb{R}$ which sends an 
  integer to $3z$ in the reals.
- To find a left adjoint for this map, we write $\lceil r \rceil$ for the 
  smallest natural above $r \in \mathbb{R}$ and $\lfloor r \rfloor$ for the 
  largest integer below $r \in \mathbb{R}$
- The left adjoint is $\lceil r/3 \rceil$
- Check: $\lceil x/3 \rceil \leq y$ $\iff x \leq 3y$
:::


::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Total order galois connections
<div id="total-order-galois"/></div>
- Consider the total orders $P = Q = \underline{3}$ with the following 
  [monotone maps](4.qmd#monotone-map):
  - \begin{tikzcd} \pagecolor{white} P \arrow[d, "f"', dotted] & \overset{1}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[d, dotted, bend right]  & \overset{2}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[ld, dotted, bend right] & \overset{3}{\bullet} \arrow[d, dotted, bend right] & P \\ Q & \overset{1}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[ru, dashed, bend right] & \overset{2}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[u, dashed, bend right]  & \overset{3}{\bullet} \arrow[u, dashed, bend right] & Q \arrow[u, "g"', dashed] \end{tikzcd}
  - These do form a Galois connection
- These maps do not form a Galois connection:
    - \begin{tikzcd} \pagecolor{white} P \arrow[d, "f"', dotted] & \overset{1}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[d, dotted, bend right]     & \overset{2}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[d, dotted, bend right=49] & \overset{3}{\bullet} \arrow[d, dotted, bend right] & P \\ Q & \overset{1}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[ru, dashed, bend right=49] & \overset{2}{\bullet} \arrow[r] \arrow[u, dashed, bend right]    & \overset{3}{\bullet} \arrow[u, dashed, bend right] & Q \arrow[u, "g"', dashed] \end{tikzcd}
    - These do not because of $p=2, q = 1$
    - $f(p)=2 \not \leq q=1$ which is not the same as $p = 1 \leq g(q)=2$
- In some sense that can be formalized, for total orders the notion of Galois 
  connection corresponds to the maps not 'crossing over.'
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-101

<div id="1-101"/></div>
Does $\mathbb{R}\xrightarrow{\lceil x/3 \rceil}\mathbb{Z}$ have a left adjoint
$\mathbb{Z} \xrightarrow{L} \mathbb{R}$? If not, why? If so, does its left 
adjoint have a left adjoint?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
-  \begin{tikzcd} \pagecolor{white}
    \mathbb{R} \arrow[d, "R"', dashed, bend right]  & 0.0 \arrow[d, dashed] \arrow[r, "\leq"] & x \arrow[rd, dashed] \arrow[r, "\leq"] & 1.0 \arrow[d, dotted] \arrow[rr, "\leq"] &  & \dots \\
    \mathbb{Z} \arrow[u, "L?"', dotted, bend right] & 0 \arrow[rr, "\leq"]                    &                                        & 1 \arrow[rr, "\leq"]                     &  & \dots
    \end{tikzcd}
- Assume we have an arbitrary left adjoint, $L$.
- For $x$ as it approaches $0.0 \in \mathbb{R}$ from the right, we have 
  $R(x) \leq 1$, therefore $L(1) \leq x$ because $L$ is left adjoint.
- Therefore $L(1)\leq 0.0$, yet this implies $1 \leq R(0.0)$.
- This contradicts $R(0.0)=0$, therefore no left adjoint exists.
:::
:::

## Back to partitions
- Given any function $S \xrightarrow{g} T$, we can induce a Galois connection 
  $Prt(S) \leftrightarrows Prt(T)$ between the sets of partitions of the domain 
  and codomain.
- Determine the left adjoint $Prt(S) \xrightarrow{g_!} Prt(T)$
    - Starting with a given partition in $S$, obtain a partition in $T$ by 
      saying two elements, $t_1,t_2$ are in the same partition if 
      $\exists s_1 \sim s_2: g(s_1)=t_1 \land g(s_2)=t_2$
        - This is not necessarily a transitive relation, so take the transitive 
          closure.
    - Determine the right adjoint $Prt(T) \xrightarrow{g^*} Prt(S)$
        - Given a [partition](2.qmd#partition) of $T$, we say two elements in 
          $S$ are connected iff $g(s_1) \sim g(s_2)$



::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-106
<div id="1-106"/></div>
Given a function $\{1 \mapsto \{1,2\}, 2 \mapsto \{1,2\}, 3 \mapsto \{3\}, 4 \mapsto \{4\}\}$ 
from the four element set $S$ to the three element set $T$

1. Choose a nontrivial [partition](2.qmd#partition) $c \in Prt(S)$ and compute 
   $g_!(c) \in Prt(T)$
2. Choose any coarser partition $g_!(c)\leq d \in Prt(T)$
3. Choose any non-coarser partition $g_!(c) > e \in Prt(T)$
4. Find $g^*(d)$ and $g^*(e)$
5. Show that the adjunction formula is true, i.e. that $c \leq g^*(d)$ (because 
   $g_!(c) \leq d$) and $g^*(e) > c$ (because $e > g_!(c)$)

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1. $c = \{(1, 3),(2,), (4,)\}$, $g_!(c)$ is then $\{(12,3),(4,)\}$
2. $d = \{(12,),(3,),(4,)\}$
3. $e = \{(12,3,4)\}$
4. $g^*(d)=\{(1,2),(3,),(4,)\}, g^*(e)=\{(1,2,3,4)\}$
5. $c \leq g^*(d)$ and $g^*(e) > c$
:::
:::

## Basic theory of Galois connections

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Adjoints in **Set**
<div id="set-adjoints"/></div>

- Let $A \xrightarrow{f} B$ be a set function, say between apples and buckets 
  into which we put each apple.
- The [pullback](4.qmd#pullback-along-monotone) along $f$, 
  $\mathbb{P}(B) \xrightarrow{f^*} \mathbb{P}(A)$, maps each subset 
  $B' \subseteq B$ to its preimage $f^{-1}(B') \subseteq A$
    - It tells you for a set of buckets all the apples contained in total.
    - It is a monotonic map which has a left and right adjoint: 
      $f_! \dashv f^* \dashv f_*$
- The left adjoint $\mathbb{P}(A)\xrightarrow{f_!}\mathbb{P}(B)$ is given by the 
  direct image
    - $f_!(A') := \{b \in B\ |\ \exists a \in A': f(a)=b\}$
    - Tells you for a set of apples all the buckets that contain at least one of 
      those apples.
- The right adjoint $\mathbb{P}(A) \xrightarrow{f_*} \mathbb{P}(B)$ is defined 
  as follows:
    -  $f_*(A') := \{b \in B\ |\ \forall a: f(a)=b \implies a \in A'\}$
    - Tells you all the buckets which are all-$A\prime$ (note that empty buckets 
      vacuously satisfy this condition).
- Adjoints often turn out to have interesting semantic interpretations.
:::

::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="galois-alternate-form"/></div>
Suppose $P \overset{g}{\underset{f}{\leftrightarrows}} Q$ are 
[monotone maps](4.qmd#monotone-map). The following are equivalent:

- $f$ and $g$ form a Galois connection where $f$ is left adjoint to $g$
- for every $p \in P, q \in Q$ we have:
    1. $p \leq g(f(p))$
    2. $f(g(q)) \leq q$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof
- Forward direction
    - Take any $p \in P$ and let $q = f(p) \in Q$
        - By reflexivity, we have in $Q$ that $f(p) \leq q$
        - By definition of Galois connection, we then have $p \leq g(q)$, so (1) 
          holds.
    - Take any $q \in Q$ and let $p = g(q) \in P$
        - By reflexivity, we have in $P$ that $p \leq g(q)$
        - By definition of Galois connection, we then have $f(p) \leq q$, so (2) 
          holds.
- Reverse direction
    - Want to show $f(p)\leq q \iff p \leq g(q)$
    - Suppose $f(p) \leq q$
        - Since $g$ is monotonic, $g(f(p)) \leq g(q)$
        - but, because (1), $p \leq g(f(p))$, therefore $p \leq g(q)$
    - Suppose $p \leq g(q)$
        - Since $f$ is monotonic, $f(p) \leq f(g(q))$
        - but, because (2), $f(g(q)) \leq q$, therefore $f(p) \leq q$
:::
:::

::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="adjoints-preserve"/></div>
- Let $P \overset{f}{\underset{g}{\rightleftarrows}} Q$ be 
  [monotone maps](4.qmd#monotone-map) with $f \dashv g$.
- Right adjoints preserve [meets](5.qmd#meet)
    - Suppose $A \subseteq Q$ is any subset and $g(A)$ is its image.
    - Then, if $A$ has a meet $\wedge A \in Q$, then $g(A)$ has a meet 
      $\wedge g(A) \in P$
    - And $g(\wedge A) \cong \wedge g(A)$
- Left adjoints preserve [joins](5.qmd#join)
    - Given $A \subseteq P$ and its image $f(A) \subseteq Q$
    - Then, if $A$ has a join $\vee A \in P$, then $\vee f(a) \in Q$ exists
    - And $f(\vee A) \cong \vee f(A)$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof
- Left adjoints preserve joins
    - let $j = \vee A \subseteq P$
    - Given $f$ is monotone, $\forall a \in A: f(a) \leq f(j)$, i.e. we have 
      $f(a)$ as an upper bound for $f(A)$
    - To show it is a *least* upper bound, take some arbitrary other upper bound 
      $b$ for $f(A)$ and show that $f(j) \leq b$
        - Because $j$ is the least upper bound of $A$, we have $j \leq g(b)$
        - Using the Galois connection, we have $f(j) \leq b$ showing that $f(j)$ 
          is the least upper bound of $f(A) \subseteq Q$.
- Right adjoints preserving meets is dual to this.

:::
:::

::: {.callout-note icon=false collapse=false}
## Proposition

<div id="adjoint-theorem-preorders"/></div>
  Adjoint functor theorem for preorders

- Suppose $Q$ is a preorder that has all meets and $P$ is any preorder.
    - A [monotone map](4.qmd#monotone-map) $Q \xrightarrow{g} P$ preserves meets 
      iff it is a right adjoint.
- Likewise, suppose $P$ has all joins and $Q$ is any preorder:
    - A [monotone map](4.qmd#monotone-map) $P \xrightarrow{f} Q$ preserves joins
     iff it is a left adjoint.
- Proved the reverse direction [here](#adjoints-preserve).

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Proof

- Given a right adjoint, construct the left adjoint by:
    - $f(p) := \bigwedge\{q \in Q\ |\ p \leq g(q)\}$
    - First need to show this is monotone:
        - If $p \leq p'$, the relationship between the joined sets of 
          $f(p)$ and $f(p')$ is that the latter is a subset of the former.
        - By [this](#adjoints-preserve) we infer that $f(p) \leq f(p')$.
    - Then need to show that it is satisfies the left adjoint property:
        - Show that $p_0 \leq g(f(p_0))$
            -  $p_0 \leq \bigwedge \{g(q)\ |\ p_0 \leq g(q)\} \cong g(\bigwedge\{q\ |\ p_0 \leq g(q)\}) = g(f(p_0))$
            - The first inequality comes from the fact that the meet of the set 
              (of which $p_0$ is a lower bound) is a greatest lower bound.
            - The congruence comes from the fact that right adjoints preserve 
              meets.
        - Show that $f(g(q_0)) \leq q_0$
            - $f(g(q_0)) = \bigwedge\{q\ |\ g(q_0) \leq g(q)\} \leq \bigwedge \{q_0\} = q_0$
            - The first inequality comes from [here](#adjoints-preserve) since 
              $\{q_0\}$ is a subset of the first set.
            - The second equality is a property of the meet of single element 
              sets.
- Proof of a left adjoint construction (assuming it preserves joins) is dual.
:::
:::

- If we replace the $\leq$ in [this proposition](#galois-alternate-form) with 
  $=$, then we obtain the notion of a [preorder isomorphism](4.qmd#preorder-iso).
- Since left adjoints preserve [joins](5.qmd#join), we know a 
  [monotone map](4.qmd#monotone-map) cannot have generative effects iff it is 
  left adjoint to some other monotone map.


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-110
<div id="1-110"/></div>
Show that if $P \xrightarrow{f}Q$ has a right adjoint $g$, then it is unique up 
to [isomorphism](4.qmd#preorder-iso). Is the same true for left adjoints?

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution

- Suppose $h$ is also right adjoint to $f$.
- What it means for $h \cong g$:
    - $\forall q \in Q:  h(q) \cong g(q)$
- $g(q) \leq h(q)$
    - Substitute $g(q)$ for $p$ in $p \leq h(f(p))$ (from $h$'s adjointness) to 
      get $g(q) \leq h(f(g(q)))$
    - Also apply $h$ to both sides of $f(g(q)) \leq q$ (from $g$'s adjointness) 
      to get $h(f(g(q)))\leq h(q)$
    - The result follows from transitivity.
- By symmetry (nothing was specified about $h$ or $g$) the proof of 
  $h(q)\leq g(q)$ is the same.
- Same reasoning for left adjoints.
:::
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-118
<div id="1-118"/></div>
Choose sets $X,Y$ with between two and four elements each, and choose a function 
$X \xrightarrow{f} Y$

1. Choose two different subsets $B_1, B_2 \subseteq Y$ and find $f^*(B_1)$ and 
   $f^*(B_2)$
2. Choose two different subsets $A_1, A_2 \subseteq X$ and find $f_!(A_1)$ and 
   $f_!(A_2)$
3. With the same $A_1, A_2$ find $f_*(A_1)$ and $f_*(A_2)$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
$\bar 3 \xrightarrow{f} \bar 4$ with $\{1 \mapsto 2, 2 \mapsto 2, 3\mapsto 4\}$,
$A_1 = \{1,2\}, A_2=\{2,3\}, B_1=\{1\}, B_2=\{1,4\}$

1. $f^*(B_1)=\varnothing, f^*(B_2)=\{4\}$
2. $f_!(A_1)=\{2\},f_!(A_2)=\{2,4\}$
3. $f_*(A_1)=\{1,2,3\},f_*(A_2)=\{1,3,4\}$

:::
:::

## Closure operators
Given a Galois connection, we can compose the left and right maps to get a 
*closure operator*.


::: {.callout-tip icon=false collapse=false}
## A *closure operator* $P \xrightarrow{j} P$ on a preorder $P$

<div id="closure-operator"/></div>
A [monotone map](4.qmd#monotone-map) such that, for all $p \in P$, we have:

1. $p \leq j(p)$
2. $j(j(p)) \cong j(p)$

:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Eval as closure
<div id="eval-as-closure"/></div>
- Example of a closure operator
- Think of the preorder of arithmatic expressions such as $12, 4+2+4, 9*(2+3)$, 
  where the $\leq$ operators denotes whether an expression can be simplified to 
  another.
- A computer program $j$ that evaluates expressions is a monotonic function on 
  the preorder to itself (if you can reduce $x$ to $y$, then $j(x)$ should be 
  able to be rewritten as $j(y)$.
- The requirements of closure operator say that $j$ should be a simplification, 
  and that trying to reduce an expression which has already been reduced will do 
  nothing further.
:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Adjunctions from closures
<div id="?"/></div>
- Just as adjunctions give rise to closure operators, from every closure 
  operator we may construct an adjunction.
- Let $P \xrightarrow{j} P$ be a closure operator.
- Get a new preorder by looking at a subset of $P$ fixed by $j$.
    - $fix_j$ defined as $\{p \in P\ |\ j(p)\cong p\}$
- Define a \left adjoint $P \xrightarrow{j} fix_j$ and \right adjoint 
  $g:fix_j \hookrightarrow P$ as simply the inclusion function.
- To see that $j \dashv g$, we need to verify $j(p) \leq q \iff p \leq q$
    - Show $\rightarrow$:
        - Because $j$ is a closure operator, $p \leq j(p)$
        - $j(p) \leq q$ implies $p \leq q$ by transivity.
    - Show $\leftarrow$:
        - By monotonicity of $j$ we have $p \leq q$ implying $j(p) \leq j(q)$
        - $q$ is a fix point, so the RHS is congruent to $q$, giving 
          $j(p) \leq q$.
:::

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Closures in logic
<div id="closure-logic"/></div>
- Examples of closure operators from logic.
- Take set of all propositions as a preorder, where $p \leq q$ iff $p$ implies $q$.
- Some modal operators are closure operators
- E.g. $j(p)$ means "Assuming Bob is in Chicago, $p$"
    - $p \implies j(p)$ (the logic is monotonic, adding assumptions does not make 
      something true into something false.
    - $j(j(p)) = j(p)$ (the assumption is idempotent)
:::

::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-119
<div id="1-119"/></div>

Given $f \dashv g$, prove that the composition of left and right adjoint 
monotone maps is a closure operator

1. Show $p \leq (f;g)(p)$
2. Show $(f;g;f;g)(p) \cong (f;g)(p)$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1.  This is one of the conditions of adjoint functors: $p \leq g(f(p))$
2.
    - The $\leq$ direction is an extension of the above: 
      $p \leq g(f(p)) \leq g(f(g(f(p))))$
    - Galois property: $q  \geq f(g(q))$, substitute $f(p)$ for $q$ to get 
      $f(p) \geq f(g(f(p)))$.
    - Because $g$ is a monotone map, we can apply it to both sides to get 
      $g(f(p)) \geq g(f(g(f(p))))$
:::
:::

## Level shifting

::: {.callout-caution icon=false collapse=false}
## Preorder of relations level shift
<div id="preorder-relations"/></div>

- Given any set $S$, there is a set $\mathbf{Rel}(S)$ of 
  [binary relations](2.qmd#relation) on $S$ (i.e. $\mathbb{P}(S \times S)$)
- This power set can be given a preorder structure using the subset relation.
- A subset of possible relations satisfy the axioms of preorder relations. 
  $\mathbf{Pos}(S) \subseteq \mathbb{P}(S \times S)$ which again inherits a 
  preorder structure from the subset relation
    - A preorder on the possible preorder structures of $S$, that's a level 
      shift.
- The inclusion map $\mathbf{Pos}(S) \hookrightarrow \mathbf{Rel}(S)$ is a right 
  adjoint to a Galois connection, while its left adjoint is 
  $\mathbf{Rel}(S)\overset{Cl}{\twoheadrightarrow} \mathbf{Pos}(S)$ which takes 
  the reflexive and transitive closure of an arbitrary relation.
:::


::: {.callout-important icon=false collapse=false}
## Exercise 1-125
<div id="1-125"/></div>

Let $S=\{1,2,3\}$

1. Come up with any preorder relation on $S$, and define 
   $U(\leq):=\{(s_1,s_2)\ |\ s_1 \leq s_2\}$ (the relation 'underlying' the 
   preorder. Note $U: \mathbf{Pos}(S) \hookrightarrow \mathbf{Rel}(S)$)
2. Pick binary relations such that $Q \subseteq U(\leq)$ and 
   $Q' \not \subseteq U(\leq)$

We want to check that the reflexive/transitive closure operation $Cl$ is really 
left adjoint to the underlying relation $U$.
   - The meaning of $Cl \dashv U$ is $Cl(R) \sqsubset \leq \iff R \sqsubset U(\leq)$, 
     where $\sqsubset$ is the order relation on $\mathbf{Pos}(S)$

1. Concretely show that $Cl(Q) \sqsubset \leq$
2. Concretely show that $Cl(Q') \not \sqsubset \leq$

::: {.callout-note collapse=true appearance="minimal"}
## Solution
1. Let the preorder be given by this diagram (with implicit reflexive arrows): 
   \begin{tikzcd} \pagecolor{white} 2 \arrow[rr] && 3 \\& 1 \arrow[lu] \arrow[ru] &  \end{tikzcd}
2. Let $Q$ be given by the following diagram
    - \begin{tikzcd} \pagecolor{white} 2 && \looparrowright 3 \\& \looparrowright 1 \arrow[lu] &\end{tikzcd}
    - and let $Q'=S\times S$
3. $Cl(Q) = \{11,12,22,33\}$ $\sqsubset$ $\leq = \{11,22,33,12,23,13\}$
4. $Cl(Q') = Q' = S \times S$ $\not \sqsubset$ $\leq$  (reason: 
   $(3,1) \in S \times S$ but $(3,1) \not \in \leq$)
:::
:::
